Hello friends
In this video let us discuss about the binary search
algorithm
So in the previous video we learned the part Lilinear
search algorithm
It was like a book with a unordered pages
And to get any particular page number we have to
check each and every page from the beginning to the
end till we find it
so binary search is actually like searching a page in
a book with ordered page numbers
Here the first page number will be one
Next will be two then three then four and so on
So assume you have such a book in your hand
with 100 pages
And I am asking you to find Page number 90
So what will you do You will take the book
and open the page linear to center
now you have the left half and right half
so we know we have 100 pages
So in the first half it will be 1to
The second half it will be 51to 100
So you will ignore the first half and consider the
second half
Only since 90 could be present in this half only
And here the page numbers are from 51to 100 again
you will divide it in half and it will be
51to 75 76
to 100
And you will ignore the first half again and search
in the second half
And this way you can easily find the page
Number 90
So unlikely
linear search
We don't need to go through all pages of the
book
We will continuously divide the book into half till we
find that particular page so we can save a lot
of time
So that is binary search so binary search can
be performed on sorted or ordered set of elements
see this example array with elements
10 23 45 70 100 111and 123
Suppose we want to search for the key 45
So as we did for the book we will first
find the middle element
We have eight elements
So the fourth one is the middle one which is
It is not the key
And now we have to check if our key is
less than or greater than 70
And it is 45 less than 70
So it could only be present in the left half
so search here only and ignored the second half again
In this half
The middle one is the second element 23 again check
Whether 45 is less than or greater than 23 it
is greater than 23
So check in the right half only
And here we have one element and it is our key
So this is what binary searches
Now let us see it's implementation in C
So we have the function binary search here which will
take the array it start end and the key to be
searched into it
And it will return one if the keys found and
it will return zero if it is not found
So we passed this array it start index zero and
end index seven and Key 45 into the function and
declare a variable mid
And we have this while loop here which will divide
array into half till we find the key or
array is completed
And when the keys found one is return
And when the arrays completely checked this condition start less
than and will fail and control comes out of the
loop and returns
Zero so let us see in first iteration start zero is less
than end seven
So go inside and find the middle element
So we have mid equal to start plus end divided
by two that is zero plus seven by two Which
three now check If the middle element is the key
So we have if arr of mid equal to key
and it is not a check whether we should search
in the left half or the right half
So we have if arr of mid less than key and
it is not 70 is actually greater than 45
So we should only check in the left half The
start should be the same Index zero but end should
be mid minus one
So in else we have end equal to mid minus
one that is three minus one Which is equal to
two now check the condition Again we have start zero
less than end two so the condition is okay So
go inside and find the new middle element
So we have mid equal to start plus end divided
by two that is zero plus two divided by two
which is equal to one so check if middle element
is a key and we have arr  of mid equal to
key
But it is not so
Next step is to find the half where key could
be present
So check if arr  of mid is less than key
and 23 is less than 45
So we should check in the right half only so
end will be the same
But start should be mid plus one
so start equal to one plus one which is
equal to two
Now Check the while Condition and two is equal to
two
So the condition is okay
So find the new middle element
It is two plus two divided by two which is
two now check if middle element equal to key and
it is so written one as the key is found
This is how it works And always remember binary search
will work only for sorted arrays
Now in the same array let us a search for the key
So first find mid which will be zero plus seven
divided by two that is three now check if middle
element is the key and it is not so check
whether to go to left side or right side
So we have
If arr  of mid less than key and 70 is
less than 150
So we should check in the right half so end
will be the same
But start will be mid plus one that is three
plus one which is equal to four
Now check the while condition and start four is less
than n seven
So going inside and find the new mid which is
four plus seven divided by two That is 11by two
which is equal to five
So middle element is that index five So check if
it is the key So we have If arr  of
mid equal to key and it is not so check
If arr  of mid is less than key and 100
is less than 150
So if the element is present it could only be
present in the right half
so set start equal to mid plus one that is five
plus one which is equal to six Now check the
condition and six is less than seven
So go inside and find the new mid and
it will be six plus seven divided by two that
is 13 by two which is equal to six
So check if it is the key
So we have
If arr  of mid equal to key and it is
not so check whether to go to left side or
right side
And we have
If arr  of mid less than key and 111is less
than 150 so it could be present in the
right half
Only so set start equal to mid plus one that is
six plus one which is equal to seven and check
The while condition in seven is equal to seven
So conditional
is Okay so go inside and find mid which will
be seven plus seven divided by two that is seven
So check if that is a key and it is
not so check whether to go to left or right
So we have If arr of mid less
than key and 123 is less than 150 so
150 could only be present in the right side
So set start equal to mid plus one that is seven
plus one which is equal to eight now check the
while condition and eight is not less than or equal
to seven
So the condition fails
It simply means we have completed checking the array and now
there is no chance that the key is present in
the array
so control comes out of the while loop and returns zero
as the key is not found
Now let us discuss about the time complexity of this
operation
So we have this array and we are searching for
key 70 which is a middle element
Then it can be found in the first comparison itself
So the best case time complexity is order of one
and it will be then the key is a middle
element
Now again we have this array and we are searching
for key 45
So first there are n elements
Then we find the middle element 70 and understood that
the key 45 could be present in the left half
only
So now we will consider only n by two elements
to 100
Now we will find the middle element here which is
23 45 could be present in the right half only
So now we will consider only this part which is
n by four elements
That is this algorithm is dividing the array into half
in each iteration
That is first
We have n elements than n by two then n
by four then n by eight and so on till
we have just one element that is n by two
raise to 0 and n by two raise to 1 and n by two
raise to 2 n by two raise to 3 up to one
that is in general n by two raise to k
equal to one so n equal to
Two raise to
K now let us take log on both sides and we
will get log two raise to K to base two
equal to log n two base two and by theories
we can write log n raise to n equal to
n into log n
So we will get K into log two base two
the value of log A base A equal to one
so value of log two base two is also equal
to one
So we will get K into one equal to log
n so the average or worst case time complexity of
binary search is order of log
n now let us have a quick comparison of the
time complexity of linear search and binary search
If we have this array and key 123
We have to make eight comparisons checking each and every
element in order to find it in linear search and
the worst case time complexity is
Order of n that is order of eight here and
in binary search
The worst case time complexity is order of log n that
is order of log eight which can be return as two
raise to 3 and can be return as three into log2base2
and value of log2base2
equal to one so three into one equal to three
and for array of eight elements
Linear
search takes eight iterations but binary search takes
only three iterations
So that is how binary search is very efficient than
linear search
But we always need sorted array in binary search
If the array  is sorted then we can undoubtedly go
for binary search
And if we have an unsorted array and to apply
binary search we have to sorted first then pass
it to binary search function so it may not give that much efficiency.